ec2 architecture and guide (#4585)
camunda/camunda-docs: docs/self-managed/reference-architecture/reference-architecture.md

## Architecture

<!-- TODO: include overview, Hamza had good pictures on this topic -->

![Camunda Architecture](./img/placeholder.png)

### Orchestration Cluster vs Web Modeler and Console

When designing a reference architecture, it's essential to understand the differences between an orchestration cluster and Web Modeler and Console self-managed. These components play crucial roles in the deployment and operation of processes, but they serve different purposes and include distinct components.

#### Orchestration Cluster

We refer to the orchestration or automation cluster to the core of Camunda.

The included components are:

- [Zeebe](/components/zeebe/zeebe-overview.md): A workflow engine for orchestrating microservices and managing stateful, long-running business processes.
- [Operate](/components/operate/operate-introduction.md): A monitoring tool for visualizing and troubleshooting workflows running in Zeebe.
- [Tasklist](/components/tasklist/introduction-to-tasklist.md): A user interface for managing and completing human tasks within workflows.

> - [Optimize](#TODO): An analytics tool for generating reports and insights based on workflow data.

Reviewer: @conceptualshark maybe you could reveal how to link to e.g. https://docs.camunda.io/optimize/next/components/what-is-optimize/

SInce Optimize is weirdly set up in the docs, I haven't figured out the linkage yet.

Author: You can sub in `$optimize$` for any `/optimize` links - so this one should look like `$optimize$/components/what-is-optimize/`.

Reviewer: thanks a lot! 🙇

- **Consistency**: Ensures consistency across deployments by standardizing system components and their configurations, which helps reduce the risk of errors and simplifies maintenance.
- **Enhanced Security**: Reference architectures incorporate best practices for securing Camunda 8 deployments, ensuring that sensitive data and processes are protected through standard security measures like encryption, authentication, and access controls.

## Customization and Flexibility

It's important to note that reference architectures are not a one-size-fits-all solution. Each organization has unique requirements and constraints that may necessitate modifications to the provided blueprints. While these reference architectures offer a solid foundation and best practices, they should be adapted to fit the specific needs of your project. Use them as a starting point to start your Camunda 8 implementation process, but be prepared to make adjustments to ensure they align with your goals and infrastructure.

## Support Considerations

> We recognize that deviations from the reference architecture are unavoidable. However, such changes will introduce additional complexity, making troubleshooting more difficult. When modifications are required, ensure they are well-documented to facilitate future maintenance and support more quickly. Camunda publishes [supported environments](/reference/supported-environments.md) information to help you navigate supported configurations.

Reviewer: you mean for the `support more quickly` part ?

> We recognize that deviations from the reference architecture are unavoidable. However, such changes will introduce additional complexity, making troubleshooting more difficult. When modifications are required, ensure they are well-documented to facilitate future maintenance and support more quickly. Camunda publishes [supported environments](/reference/supported-environments.md) information to help you navigate supported configurations.

Reviewer: replaced the support with troubleshooting

#### Web Modeler and Console

The Web Modeler and Console are designed to oversee and manage multiple orchestration clusters. It offers tools and interfaces for administrators and developers to monitor clusters and create BPMN models. The management cluster operates independently from the orchestration cluster and can function without requiring an orchestration cluster.

- [Console](/components/console/introduction-to-console.md): A central management interface for monitoring and managing multiple orchestration clusters.
- [Web Modeler](/self-managed/modeler/web-modeler/installation.md): A web-based tool for designing and deploying workflow models to any available orchestration cluster.
- [Identity](/self-managed/identity/what-is-identity.md): A service for managing user authentication and authorization.

:::note
The orchestration cluster has its own integrated Identity component, while Web Modeler and Console run separate and dedicated Identity deployment. For production environments, using an external identity provider is recommended.
:::

### Databases

> Databases can be deployed as part of the Camunda clusters, but using externally managed database services offers several advantages:

Reviewer: good point, didn't actually mean it as managed services but as what you suggest of being simply external.

If running a single instance is preferred, make sure to implement [regular backups](/self-managed/operational-guides/backup-restore/backup-and-restore.md) since resilience will be limited.

## Camunda 8 Deployment Reference architectures

### Kubernetes

Kubernetes is a powerful orchestration platform for containerized applications. Using a reference architecture for Kubernetes can help organizations deploy and manage their applications more effectively. It provides guidelines for setting up clusters, managing workloads, and ensuring high availability and scalability. This approach is ideal for organizations looking to leverage the benefits of containerization and self-healing capabilities.

<!-- TODO add link or card for AWS ref arch -->

> ### Manual (Bare Metal / VMs)

Reviewer: Yes, you're right containers is missing, will add it

For manual I added the JAR mentioning. I would not differentiate between different operating systems.

#### Orchestration Cluster

We refer to the orchestration or automation cluster to the core of Camunda.

The included components are:

- [Zeebe](/components/zeebe/zeebe-overview.md): A workflow engine for orchestrating microservices and managing stateful, long-running business processes.
- [Operate](/components/operate/operate-introduction.md): A monitoring tool for visualizing and troubleshooting workflows running in Zeebe.
- [Tasklist](/components/tasklist/introduction-to-tasklist.md): A user interface for managing and completing human tasks within workflows.
- [Optimize]($optimize$/components/what-is-optimize/): An analytics tool for generating reports and insights based on workflow data.
- [Identity](/self-managed/identity/what-is-identity.md): A service for managing user authentication and authorization.
- [Connectors](/components/connectors/introduction.md): Pre-built integrations for connecting Zeebe with external systems and services.

> The orchestration cluster is central to Camunda's workflow automation, which focuses on managing and executing processes through interconnected components. Each component within the orchestration cluster is part of an integrated system that works together to provide end-to-end process orchestration. Zeebe handles workflow execution, while Operate provides monitoring, and other components such as Tasklist and Optimize add functionality like human task management and analytics. These components form a unified cluster that is tightly integrated to ensure seamless communication and data flow. This design ensures that all components are in sync, working collectively to maintain consistent state management, data integrity, and smooth process orchestration across the entire cluster. This architecture ensures reliable process execution with clear boundaries between each workflow engine's operation.

Reviewer: great suggestion, thank you!

#### Web Modeler and Console

> The Web Modeler and Console are designed to oversee and manage multiple orchestration clusters. It offers tools and interfaces for administrators and developers to monitor clusters and create BPMN models. The management cluster operates independently of the orchestration cluster and can function without requiring an orchestration cluster.

Author: I am not sure if this description applies anymore - possibly from when it was meant to be a unified management cluster (no longer used)? Unsure if the below is 100% accurate, but is more of what I understand:

```suggestion
Web Modeler and Console are designed to interact with multiple orchestration clusters. Console offers tools and interfaces for administrators to monitor clusters, and Web Modeler allows developers to create and deploy BPMN models. 

These components operate independently of both the orchestration cluster and each other, and do not require an orchestration cluster to function.
```

Reviewer: true, I think it isn't used word wise anymore. Sadly

### Containers

Containers, such as Docker, offer a middle ground between the manual JAR and Kubernetes approaches. They provide a lightweight, portable, and consistent runtime environment, making it easier to develop, test, and deploy applications across different environments. Containers encapsulate an application and its dependencies, ensuring that it runs reliably regardless of where it is deployed.

### Manual JAR (Bare Metal / VMs)

For organizations that prefer traditional infrastructure, reference architectures for bare metal or virtual machines (VMs) offer a structured approach to system deployment. These architectures provide best practices for setting up physical servers or VMs, configuring networks, and managing storage using Infrastructure as Service cloud roviders. They are suitable for environments where containerization or use of Kubernetes services may not be feasible.

<!-- TODO add link or card for AWS EC2 -->

### Local Development

While both options are suitable for trying out Camunda 8 locally, you might also consider exploring [Camunda 8 Run](/self-managed/setup/deploy/local/c8run.md) for a developer focused experience.

> ## Helping Customers Decide

Author: I think we can move the bullet points for these sections up to the k8s, containers, manual sections above - that way they are combined/the information is more compact and less duplicated. 

If there is a strong desire to separate this information out, I think a separate and more dedicated "Which option is right for me?" guide would be preferable to including it here, and I'd recommend folding the sections together for now.

Author: This pulls the links to each individual reference architecture guide up as well, which is nice for this section, too.

Reviewer: I'd be happy if you could implement those changes 🙇!
